Advanced OS                             L05b. Lamport Clocks                  Mohamed Ameen Amer




L05b. Lamport Clocks

Introduction:
•   Each node in a distributed system knows:
    -  Its own events.
    -  Its communication events.
•   Lamport’s logical clocks:
    -  The idea here is that we need to associate a time stamp with each event in the entire distributed
       system.
    -  We’ll have a local clock (counter) attached to each process. The time stamp would be the
       counter value.
    -  The counter value is monotonically increasing.
    -  The time stamp of communication events will be either the counter value of the sender process
       or the receiver process whichever greater.


Logical Clock Conditions:
•   If we have two events 𝑎 and 𝑏 in the same process 𝑖, then 𝐶𝑖 (𝑎) < 𝐶𝑖 (𝑏).
•   If we have a communication event between event 𝑎 on process 𝑖 and event 𝑑 on process 𝑗 then:
    -   𝐶𝑖 (𝑎) < 𝐶𝑗 (𝑑)
    -   𝐶𝑗 (𝑎) = max⁡(𝐶𝑖 (𝑎) + +, 𝐶𝑗 )
•   If we have two concurrent events 𝑏 and 𝑑, then the time stamps will be arbitrary.
•   This means that Lamport Clocks gives us a partial order of all the events happening on the
    distributed system.


Lamport Total Order:
•   If we have two events 𝑎 process 𝑖 and 𝑏 on process 𝑗, and we can to assert that 𝑎 is totally ordered
    ahead of 𝑏
    (𝑎 ⇒ 𝑏) if and only if:
    -   𝐶𝑖 (𝑎) < 𝐶𝑗 (𝑑) or
    -   𝐶𝑖 (𝑎) = 𝐶𝑗 (𝑑) and 𝑃𝑖 ≪ 𝑃𝑗 , where (≪) is and arbitrary well-known condition to break the tie
        (e.g. the greater the process ID the higher the order).
•   Once we get the total order, time stamps are meaningless.




Page | 1
Advanced OS                             L05b. Lamport Clocks                  Mohamed Ameen Amer


Distributed Mutual Exclusion (ME) Lock Algorithm:
•   In a distributed system, we don’t have a shared memory to facilitate lock implementation. So we’ll
    use Lamport Clocks to implement a lock.
•   Every process will have a queue data structure ordered by the “Happened Before” relationship.
•    Any process that needs to acquire the lock will send a message to all the other processes with its
    time stamp as the request time.
•   Each other process will put the request in its queue, and then acknowledges the request.
•   If we have a tie (Two processes sent the same time stamp), we break it by giving priority to the
    process with higher ID.
•   A process knows that it has the lock if:
    -   Its request is on top of the queue.
    -   It has already received acknowledges from the other processes.
•   Whenever a process wants to release a lock, it sends an unlock message to all other processes.
•   When the other processes receive the unlock message, they remove the sending process entry from
    their queues.
•   The algorithm assumptions:
    -   Message arrive in order.
    -   There’s no message loss.
    -   The queues are totally ordered.
•   Message complexity:
    -   𝑁 − 1 request messages.
    -   𝑁 − 1 acknowledge messages.
    -   𝑁 − 1 unlock messages.
    -   𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 3(𝑁 − 1).
    -   Can we do better?
        If a process 𝑖 lock request precedes another process 𝑗 request in the queue, we can defer the
        acknowledgement of 𝑖 and use the unlock message itself as an acknowledgement for 𝑗.


Lamport Physical Clock:
•   In real world scenarios, the logical clock might be drifting of the real time due to anomalies in the
    logical clocks.
•   We can say the event 𝑎 happened before event 𝑏 in real time (𝑎⁡ ⟼ 𝑏) if:
    -   𝐶𝑖 (𝑎) < 𝐶𝑖 (𝑏)
    -   Physical conditions:
        1. PC1: Bound on individual clock drift:
                                              𝑑𝐶𝑖 (𝑡)
                                            (         − 1) < 𝑘⁡⁡⁡∀𝑖;⁡(𝑘 ≪ 1)
                                               𝑑𝑡
        2. PC2: Bound on mutual drift:
                                                ∀𝑖, 𝑗:⁡𝐶𝑖 (𝑡) − 𝐶𝑗 (𝑡) ≪ 𝜖


Page | 2
Advanced OS                            L05b. Lamport Clocks       Mohamed Ameen Amer


•   IPC time and clock drift:
        -   If 𝜇 is the lower bound on IPC, to avoid anomalies
            when:
                                   𝑎𝑖 ⟼ 𝑏𝑖
                   (𝑡
            1. 𝐶𝑖 + 𝜇) − 𝐶𝑗    (𝑡) >0
            2. 𝐶𝑖 (𝑡 + 𝜇) − 𝐶𝑖 (𝑡) > 𝜇(1 − 𝑘)
            Using equations 1 and 2, and bound 𝜖 on mutual
            drift:
                                                  𝜇 ≥ 𝜖⁄(1 − 𝑘)




Page | 3
